P2P
===

1. Overview
-----------

The P2P module is the underlying Hyperchain network communication
module. It guarantees the data transmission security of the
communication link. The user can configure whether to enable TLS
security and enable data transmission encryption (or replace the data
encryption algorithm) through the configuration file. In this module,
the physical connection (Network layer) is separated from the logical
connection. The overall architecture of the module is as follows:

.. figure:: ../../images/p2p_architecture.001.jpeg
   :alt: p2p_architecture.001


2. Hypernet
-----------

As the underlying communication infrastructure of Hyperchain, Hypernet
provides network communication services to the upper layer by
registering slots. Its main functions include establishment of
communication links, data transmission, link security, and link activity
control. It has two important members ``Server`` and ``Client``. The
overall structure is as follows:

.. figure:: ../../images/hypernet.001.jpeg
   :alt: hypernet.001


Server
~~~~~~

In Hypernet, the Server is responsible for registering network slots,
listening for services, and distributing various types of messages from
the Client.

**Network Slot**

As the main mechanism of Hypernet to communicate with the upper layer,
the slot is actually a multi-dimensional thread-safe map, which maps the
relevant methods to different message processors for processing.

Slots as server members, with a set of slot that correspond to different
namespaces, process messages from different namespaces, respectively.

Client
~~~~~~

Client corresponds with the Server, mainly used to handle different
message sending requests. Usually a Client corresponds to several
different remote Server (because a node will be connected to multiple
remote peer), and communicates with different servers which will
distribute message to different namespace slot to deal with.

TLS
~~~

Transport layer security of Hyperchain, default enable, which USES the
TLSCA certificate issued by the Hyperchain to carry out secure
communication, which guarantees the security of information and
communications from the transport layer. Further, this option is
optional.

TLS guarantees the security of information transmission at the transport
layer. It is the most common implementation standard for network
transmission and is adopted in almost all network security transmission.

3. P2PManager
-------------

``P2PManager`` is used to allocate ``PeerManager`` in different
namespaces, it has only one global instance.

PeerManager
~~~~~~~~~~~

``PeerManager`` is mainly responsible for the following sections:

-  Provide different external message sending service interfaces;
-  Post message to Hyperchain message middleware\ ``eventhub``;
-  Use ``PeerManagerEventHub`` message middleware distributes and
   manages the control messages of ``PeerManager`` to maintain the state
   of the entire logical network and process more complicated message
   logic.

In the entire network, the node can be called ``Node`` or ``Peer``, the
following look at the difference between the two.

Peer
^^^^

All logical remote nodes are called peer, a remote node corresponds to a
peer, the peer is mainly used for processing the logically message
sending request. Its main function is to encrypt the message, and then
call the corresponding message sending method of Hypernet Client, and
the message needs to be attached namespace information.

Node
^^^^

Node that is the local node, which is also a logical server, is mainly
responsible for logically message processing of node, decryption of the
message received from the network and then posts decrypted message to
Hyperchain message middleware ``eventhub``. Finally, the message
middleware identifies this type of message should be post to which
module to process, such as consensus module, executor module.

Data transmission encryption
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Data Transfer Encryption refers to the encryption of transaction
information and communication messages transmitted over the network.
According to user requirements, all information transmitted on
Hyperchain network can be encrypted. The encryption scheme is similar to
TLS, firstly the node use the ECDH algorithm to negotiate the
corresponding session key, and then the session key is used to encrypt
the service information which is decrypted by the peer. All the
communication between nodes will be encrypted with different session
keys. This is a supplement to the security of the transport layer.
Currently, hyperchain messages can use Symmetric Encryption through
configuration, and can be handled in this way if there is a more
sophisticated message encryption requirement.
